---
template: blog-post
title: HAPPY ONAM 2020
slug: /onam
date: 2020-08-31 11:38
description: "Onam, Harvest Festival, Mahabali, "
featuredImage: /assets/onam-image.jpg
---
# Festivities

Onam is the annual harvest festival of people in and around Kerala, which is located in the southern tip of the country and is celebrated for 10 days. According to the Gregorian calendar, the festival falls in the months of August-September as Malayalis all over the world unite and partake in the celebrations. This year, it began on August 22 and will end on August 31.

The 10-day festivities also see people participating in boat races called Vallam Kali, Tiger dances called Pulikali, worship the God or Onathappan, Tug of War, Thumbi Thullal or women’s dance ritual, Mask dance or Kummattikali, Onathallu or martial arts, Onavillu/music, Onapottan (costumes), folk songs among other fun activities. The last four days are celebrated with much gusto as people wear new dresses, decorate their houses and prepare the traditional meal, which is knows as sadhya. Even though things are slightly different this year due to Covid people have been celebrating with gusto.

Kerala as with the rest of India is a predominantly agrarian economy and the people are dependent on agriculture. Around a few decades back, social prestige depended on the size of haystack in your house and the no of cattle owned. It was mostly a barter economy and labourers were paid in bags of rice. In such a scenario Onam signifies prosperity when the fields have been harvested and granary is full. Onam also kickstarts the rural economy as people start buying clothes and jewelry after the lull of the monsoon months. 

# **Mythology**

One of the most enduring mythological characters is King Mahabali who defeated the devas and began ruling over all three worlds. King Mahabali was a kind-hearted asura king who was much-loved by the people. The devas ever insecure, whined about King Mahabali’s popularity to Lord Vishnu and he was forced to contain Mahabali.

Lord Vishnu took on his fifth avatar, in the form of the Brahmin dwarf Vamana, and paid a visit to King Mahabali. King Mahabali asked Vamana what he wished for, to which Vamana responded, “three pieces of land”. When Vamana was granted his wish, he grew in size and in his first and second pace respectively, he covered the sky, and then the netherworld. 

When Lord Vishnu was about to take his third pace, King Mahabali offered his own head to the God. Lord Vishnu was so impressed by Mahabali that he granted Mahabali the right to visit his kingdom and people every year during Onam festivities.

# Recent Trends

As we move away from an agrarian society to a knowledge based industrial society, things have started to change. We don't need to wait for a festival to splurge and we have online sales every alternate day. 

Myths have started to get altered. Around the 90s when visual medium was taking root, some mimicry artists started a trend of releasing onam parodies. These parodies which used to be very popular as it used to talk about the local issues infused with a dose of humour. In these skits Mahabali was portrayed as neighborhood pot-bellied uncle. 

The middle aged, righteous, active and judicious king Mahabali has been cast in the image of a santaclaus who comes every year, so 

Recently another trend has come into practice, the practice of Vamana Jayanthi. I could be wrong but I didn't encounter this till a few years back. Mahabali who till recently was a just king has become the arrogant king who needed to be taught a lesson. This myth is being heavily pushed by powerful ruling classes of today. 

As societies changes, the myths, the stories we tell ourselves change. Will the myth of Mahabali change. Only Time can tell.

Wishing you all a Happy and prosperous Onam 2020  

**References**

Image taken from a Kerala tourism tweet

<https://twitter.com/s3nkul/status/1300390015369793537>